all right you're back how are you guys
doing okay alright so actually we have
some interesting stuff coming up this
week we'll talk about today we'll talk
about directional derivatives and then
Thursday we'll talk about maxima and
minima functions so this you know we're
getting to some more interesting on
parts of this course so the first topic
today is directional derivatives
very very lively today that's good
so my let's focus okay
directional derivatives we thought we
have talked about partial derivatives
okay if you have a function in two
variables it's natural to differentiate
with respect to each of the two
variables X or Y right and we've done
that and that's what we called a partial
derivative we call them f sub X or also
DF DF and also f sub y DF dy and now the
question is is there anything else that
we can say about derivatives for
functions and more than one variable
like function two variables so to answer
that we have to remember what is the
derivative what does it represent
okay derivative represents the rate of
change change we can believe it right
people simply seem to have forgotten
that one you know but a year ago it was
all the rage so derivative in general is
the rate of change what do I mean by
this
let's say let's say you're crossing a
street okay and you see that there is a
car you don't want to be hit by a car so
you try to estimate how much time you
have to cross the street right so what
do you estimate you don't need to meet a
distance right you estimate the distance
divided by time you estimate how quickly
it's coming right because so you're our
brain is wired so that even without
thinking about it we are we are watching
you know how it
and what is the distance of the covers
in a given you know short period of time
and that gives us an idea how fast it
will be here and we want to make sure
that it won't be here while we're
crossing right so if it's going too fast
we'll wait and some people will go
anyway but this you shouldn't so you
wait and if it's going slowly then you
can you cross right so what you're
interested is the rate of change is the
rate of change of what of the distance
how quickly how quickly is it
approaching you the car
in this particular case right and that's
what we call the velocity right so the
last is really the ratio between
distance and traveled and the time that
was required to travel that distance but
you can measure it over one second or
you know ten seconds and so on but if
you want to if you want to estimate the
kind of instantaneous velocity you want
to measure it over a very short period
of time right like 1/10 of a second one
hundredth of a second so what you really
want to do is take the limit when the
time becomes very very short goes to
zero of the of the ratio of the distance
traveled and the time and that that's
the derivative right so the derivative
is the instantaneous rate of change at
that very moment that's why we study
derivatives in the first place because
it gives us an idea of the rate of
change at a given moment and also as we
have learned this is the first step in
doing linear approximation when we have
a complicate function and we try to
approximate it by a linear function in
the first approximation when we look at
that car we are approximating it through
its movement as them as as a movement at
constant speed even though we realize
that the country can go faster and
slower but we are we are trained to
first up in the first approximation
that's what we call first approximation
we look at the instantaneous speed of
that car in other words we are
approximating it smooth movement by a
straight line movement by line at a
constant with constant velocity okay so
that's why the first derivative is
important it gives that information
about this first approximation but the
bottom line is that the derivative is
the rate of change so when we have a
function in one variable it's very clear
what the derivative should
II it will just be there's only one
choice we have to look at the function
one variable you can just take you know
df/dx
right that's the limit when of the ratio
of the increment and the function over
the increment of the argument when the
increment of the argument goes to zero
questions okay but if you have function
two variables right there is no obvious
choice for for that you can take the
limit you can divide you can integrate
the limit of the ratio by Delta X or
Delta Y for example and that's how we
get the partial derivatives in other
words in order to define a derivative we
have to say rate of change with respect
to what right there is a rate of change
with respect to X there is a rate of
change with respect to Y and these are a
priori two different rates of change
that's how we get these two different
derivatives but now let us think about
it geometrically so here the X here is
the XY plane and here is our point and
so we have a function on two variables
which assigns to each point on this
plane a certain number this is what we
call f f of XY you have a point
XY this function assigns to it a value f
of XY right and so now we are trying to
see how this function changes with
respect to one of the two variables and
the way you can think about it
geometrically let me draw it like this
you can try to move away from this point
along the x axis or in the direction of
X right and you can see how the function
changes with respect when you do that so
let's say if you if this is X and this
is X plus Delta X right so then you
would have f of X plus Delta X Y minus f
of X
/ Delta X so this looks like this looks
like this I wrote it I call this Delta F
because if you have a function one
variable there is no ambiguity but now
let's rewrite this you know in a more
similar form f of X plus Delta X minus f
of X divided by Delta X so you see this
this ratio is very similar to this ratio
but now you here you have a function
which you evaluate at X plus Delta X and
also values of X you take the difference
divided by Delta X here you only
increase one of the variables X by Delta
X but you keep Y fixed which was of
course the rule we followed when we
calculate partial derivative we said we
fix the Y variable right frees the Y
variable and then we just change the X 1
the X variable so that's very similar
but we've made a choice geometrically
the choice is moving along the x axis
and then we if we take the limit of this
one Delta X goes to 0 that that's the
first partial derivative right this is f
sub x DF DX at this point right to get
this this second partial derivative we
would go in this direction so then this
would be Y and this would be Delta y
plus Delta Delta Y so we would we would
write DF dy as the limit when Delta Y
goes to 0 of f of X y plus Delta Y minus
7x 1 divided by Delta so here we freeze
the first variable but we are we are
changing the second variable and we look
at the rate of change as we do that and
algebraically it looks like that's all
we can do because there are only two
variables so we can do the we can
calculate the rate of change with
respect to the first variable or the
second but if you look at it
geometrically which is why I drew this
picture you
see that these two vectors are just two
possible directions in which you can
move away from this point right how
about how about moving in this direction
or in this direction or in this
direction
geometrically it seems clear that all of
them you know I'm a meaningful have the
right to exist and we should you know
understand what happens in each of these
directions in other words it is only in
illusion that there are these two
preferred directions this one and this
one in fact there are many more okay
and just like we could call it just like
we could calculate the rate of change in
the direction of X or in the direction
of Y we could and should also be able to
calculate the rate of change in in any
direction so of course then you can ask
why is that why should we do that why is
that interesting that's the next
question in other words what are the
applications of that we'll talk about
this but for now I just want to set up
the procedure and set in and introduce
this concept and this is the concept of
directional derivative it's the rate of
change in a more general direction than
x and y that's what it is so how do we
go about calculating this and what is
the result so first of all we have to
choose a direction vector rate of change
with respect to what direction so I have
to choose the reaction vector
ha vector and so that's a vector on the
plane right so that's going to be a
vector of the form a B for if you want
AI plus BJ so say the this vector would
have two components x and y this would
be a and this would be B now if I take a
proportional vector if I take a vector
in the same direction but x by a certain
number I would get the same direction
right so in a way we don't want to
consider all possible directions with
all possible vectors we really care
about the direction rather than the
vector itself so what we should do is
amongst all that is pointing in this
direction we should choose one okay and
of course there is a natural way to do
that we'll just choose a vector which
has length 1 or norm 1 so let's assume
assume that the norm norm or length
whatever you like to call it is 1 what
does it mean it means that the square
root of H squared plus B squared is 1
for example we can take vector 1 0 which
is I that's that's this yellow vector
which I drew at the beginning which is
parallel to the X which goes along the x
axis that corresponds to the direction
along the x axis right or we can take 0
1 which is the vector J most of them are
unit vector certainly these are not all
path possible Direction vectors we could
take for example 1 over square root of 2
1 over square root of 2 that would also
have length 1 and it will be vector
which goes which has angle 45 degrees to
the x axis so it's a kind of a bisector
vector goes sort of in the middle
between x and y or you can take square
root of 3 over 2
1/2
so that's a vector which has the angle
30 degrees to the x-axis right and so on
forum anymore so let's suppose we've
chosen such a vector let's call it U
let's call this u U for unit unit vector
unit meaning that it has length 1 or
norm 1 so now we would like to define
introduce the notion of rate of change
rate of change with respect to this
lecture so the direction and this is
what we'll call directional derivative
the reaction of derivative so maybe at
this point actually so I would like to I
would like to adjust my notation to to
emphasize that I would like to I would
like to choose a particular point x0 y0
I haven't done this I didn't do it
earlier but I think that it's better to
do it because otherwise we'll be will be
confused later on as to what what what
stands for a variable in what stands for
a particular value particular coordinate
of a point so likewise here I would have
a y 0 X 0 and here y 0 and here I made a
mistake
why do ok all right so let's just do
that to be sort of on a safe side so
directional derivative at the point x0
y0
there's add at the point x0 y0 in the
direction u direction u is the rate of G
at the reach of F of a function f is the
rate of change is the rate of change of
F in the direction you and it is defined
in the same way as before what I'm going
to do now I'm going to let my point move
in the direction u which means that I
would say that X 0 so the vector X I can
throw it again so that this will be
vector X x0 y0 and this will be the
direction vector a B okay so I would
like to move in this direction which
means that I take the vector x0 y0 the
position vector of my point and I add
this use this unit vector with some
multiple H H will be a small number
because I don't want to use epsilon
right soon use H but you can you can use
any letter you want but this is going to
be this H will play the role of this
Delta X or Delta Y in the earlier
formulas but I don't want to use that
Delta X or Delta Y because we are now
not differentiating with respect to X or
Y we are doing kind of a mixed
derivative so that's why we are actually
changing both x and y so this is going
to be H a and y 0 plus h B so you see
this unit vector has two components a B
so so changing the original point by in
this direction by H means that we change
X 0
first coordinate by H a and the second
coordinate y 0 by H B so that's that
this these are going to be the arguments
which I will substitute in F so that's
going to be X 0 plus h a and then y 0
plus h B so that's a new value that
that's a new point and that's a new
value minus the old value at x0 y0 and
then i will divide by h so you see if I
chose if I chose a B to be 1 0 the
vector which goes in the X direction
only and I denote that H by Delta X then
this formula would become this formula
because f0 would change by just Delta X
which now I call h y0 will not change at
all because the second component would
be 0 so I would get exactly this formula
if on the other hand I chose so we get
DF DX if I chose this to be 0 1 and H to
be Delta Y then we will get we will get
the DF dy right for the same reason
because in that case if my if my
direction vector is 0 1 X X is not
changing but Y is changing by H which we
can then call Delta Y and then we'll
exactly recover this formula so what
I've written is there is a
generalization of those formulas where I
am allowed I'm changing both x and y at
the same time but in a controlled way
along a given vector so the increment is
not random but it depends on one
parameter H and it looks like this H a
HB that's exactly geometrically that
exactly means that we are moving away
from this point in this direction ok
is that clear any questions
okay so clearly then what we are
calculating is the is the increment of
the function in this direction and when
we divide by the increment of along the
you know along this path or along this
line H we get the rate of change and for
a given finite H it's going to be an
approximation to the actual rate of
change but if we take the limit provided
the de limit exists of course which we
are assuming here if we take the limit
it goes to zero
we end up with the instantaneous rate of
change at that very moment in that or
more precisely at that very point x0 y0
and that's the direction derivative and
we call it DS of U of F at x0 y0
that's annotation by definition this is
the distribution okay
so once again examples
examples are G for the vector I 6x I is
just f sub X x0 y0 and for the vector j
it is the second part of the date
but this is the kind of a mixture okay
so now what is it equal to can we
calculate it by using a rule similar to
the rules we use for partial derivatives
for partial derivatives we could
calculate them rather easily that's
right
okay so here is the question the
question is here's the question what do
this what do this
what is the points of this form
represent on the plane right or this
more precisely these points on the plane
because I'm evaluating now my function f
at points of this form x 0 plus h a y0
plus HB right that's what I'm doing here
and I'm subtracting right so it's
natural to ask this point where do they
lie this points
well I rewrite this as the sum of two
vectors one is the position vector of
the initial point x0 y0 and the second
is h times u right but let's separate
two questions first question is about
what those points represent right so
first of all the set of points of this
form where H is a real number is the
line which passes through this point in
the direction of this vector u so this
is something which I didn't even
mentioned because I assume that this is
somehow obvious right because this is
exactly how we got the equations of
parametric equations for lines a few
weeks ago when we got equations for
primary equations for lines a few weeks
ago we also took the initial vector
sorry the position vector of the initial
point plus h times what we called V so
this you now plays the role of V and
instead of H we usually write T but it
doesn't matter right so that so this is
precisely the form of the line which
passes through this point in the
direction of this vector U of course we
did it mostly on r3 in space and now I'm
doing it on the plane but the result is
the same similar but only two
coordinates instead of three but
otherwise it's the same okay so that
should be clear that that this this
point all of this points lie on this
line the line obtained by moving away
from this point image in the direction
of this vector or the opposite direction
for that matter okay
so that's the first question the second
question is why do we take the limit
when H goes to zero for the same reason
why we took the limit when Delta goes to
0 Delta Y goes to 0 if we don't take the
limit we get an approximation to the
rate of change it's likely car is moving
and you take the distance it has
traveled over one side you know over the
period of one second and gyy by one okay
what do you get well the even during
this 1 second it goes faster and slower
so it is an approximation to its
velocity during that time but if you do
it over 100 of a second it's going to be
even closer to a closer approximation
and so on so if you really interested in
the instantaneous velocity of the car at
that very moment you have to take the
limit
that's right that's right that's right
but I'm dividing you see I'm dividing
these stones by time of course if I
didn't divide by time think of HS time
the car is moving in this direct analogy
with the car is much better for function
with one variable but never mind
if you don't divide by H you'll just get
zero when H goes to zero right so this
the numerator becomes very small and the
denominator becomes very small but you
take the ratio and you capture the rate
of change like the rate of jail it's not
change it's the rate of change that we
should be leaving let down right because
the rate of change means that you take
the increment the difference between the
values of the function and you divide by
the difference in the argument the point
is that now we have two arguments so we
cannot we cannot just take the point
this point minus this point right we
have to take we have to choose a
particle direction and an H is the H is
that if the would then control the
increment in that direction okay so I
hope I hope it's clear now now so this
this is a set up this is set up this is
a definition of the direction derivative
which I which kind of do is very
dramatic but now I want to get an
algebraic and so for it because I don't
want each time take the limit and try to
figure out what this limit is equal to I
would like to have an efficient
computational tool for this when you get
this problem on homework you want to
you're asked to calculate the
directional derivative you want to get
the answer very quickly right and to get
the answer we have to get the answer we
have to use a tool which is actually
very useful on its own on its own right
which is called chain rule
so to calculate it we will use a chain
rule to compute it whose chain rule so
what is the chain rule so chain rule is
something you learned all right you've
learnt already in the case of a function
one variable which is that suppose you
have a function one variable f of X but
F is also function of some variable T
right and suppose you want to calculate
the derivative of F with respect to T
right and so the result is that it's
going to be DF DX times DX DT and now
you can appreciate how easy it is to
prove this formula if you really
understand what the differential is
which is what I explained couple weeks
ago right I explain what the
differential is so if the function is
differentiable this DF makes perfect
sense as a certain linear function and
you can what you can apply to these
functions like DF DX and D G the same
rules that we apply to everything and so
in particular we can actually cancel out
the X in the numerator and denominator
and that's what this formula really is
the formula is very very lamented is
just a statement that you can cancel out
this DX DX is 4 in in distractions you
see so there is no mystery I mean the
way maybe it was presented before it was
kind of mysterious but in fact there is
no mystery if you if you make sense out
of differential if you explain what it
is then and the function is
differentiable in other words that the
DF actually can be defined then you can
actually slide this rule and you can
just cancel out this numerator and
denominator
under suitable conditions right so
that's the dance of chain ruling for one
variable so now let's suppose that you
have a function in two variables f of X
Y okay but x and y are in turn functions
of another variable which we'll call H
so now I would like to calculate what is
DF D H so let me draw it to my fulling
diagram so this is half f is a function
of x and y and x is a function of H and
Y is a function of H so then F becomes a
function of H by composition because for
each value of H you will have some value
of x and some value of y and then you
plug them in into F and you get some
value so effectively you get a function
of H this it's like a chain of two
functions or more three functions as f
there is this function in the risk
function and by substituting this
function G 1 and G 2 into F you get a
new function of H and once you get a new
function of H you can ask what is the
derivative of this function respect to H
and of course you know that it's all of
this discussion I'm assuming that this
derivative exists which is of course not
guaranteed certain conditions have to be
satisfied for the function f G G 1 and G
2 but in all of our examples those
conditions will be satisfied so I'm not
I'm not sort of focusing on those
conditions too much I'm just going I'm
just trying to explain the formula which
we'll get once these conditions are
satisfied and so what is this formula we
have to work we have to compute
the fvh how can we do this well we have
to remember the formula for DF which we
had two weeks ago and formula for DF was
f sub X DX or actually write net let me
write it by using this notation will be
slightly better remember that we had two
different tool possible notation for
partial derivatives DF DX or F sub X so
I'm just using this one but it's the
same as SS sub X DX plus DF D Y D Y so
that's DF let's substitute in this
formula we just need to divide this
expression by D H so we'll just divide
it here and here right so it will get DF
DX D H o DX h plus g f dy dy vh g so
we've got a very simple formula for the
for the derivative of f respect to H and
it's very similar to the old formula an
old formula you have to differentiate by
X and then X by T but now there are sort
of two channels there are two channels
the respect to which F could depend on
age the first channel through X and
second channel is through Y so through X
it depends in this way you have to take
the partial derivative of F with respect
to X and and then the derivative of X
respect to H and so the second channel
you get the second term but it's very
very very easy to remember if you if you
draw a diagram like this note that in
this formula I cannot I cannot cancel
these guys out because while DX actually
makes perfect sense as a differential
this curly D F or DF doesn't make sense
by itself right I think I explained this
when we talk about partial derivatives
the notation is just for the ratio and
it is the partial derivative
but the this and this by itself that
would make sense so I can't prove this
formula by by canceling out things and
denominator numerators and denominators
instead I'm proving this formula by
using the formula for the differential
and I'm just dividing this formula by D
H when I divide on the left hand side I
get this expression when I divide on the
right hand side I replace DX by D HDH I
place dy by D Y D H that's the problem I
get okay so that's the formula for for
the derivative when you have this chain
of functions why am i explaining all
this because I claim that to calculate I
can calculate the formula for the
directional derivative by using
pre-sighted this rule for the following
reason I can think of this of this
function as the function in which is
obtained in the same in this way namely
I will just say that I have a function f
of X Y and then I will have X is equal
to x0 + H a and Y is equal to y0 plus HB
right so this is what I call in this
general setup by G 1 of H and G 2 of H
this is G 1 over H and this is G 2 of H
they are very simple they are just I
just take them from the from the formula
for the directional derivative so now I
can apply this rule so the point is that
G U of F at F 0 y 0 is exactly DF D H in
which then I substitute
H is equal to zero right because what
I'm doing is I'm just taking this
function the composition of these
functions when make exactly this that I
have you know F in which I substitute X
0 class aah and y 0 plus D H and I take
its derivative at 0 taking derivative at
0 precisely means the type I subtract
the value at H equals 0 and the value at
H equals 0 is exactly X 0 y 0 which is
what I have and I divide by H and I take
the limit so so this is just rewriting
this ratio this ratio can be considered
as as a derivative of this ample on this
composition of functions at H equals 0
but now I can calculate this derivative
by using the chain rule right so I use
the chain rule so what do I get I have
to get which is just this formula so I
just get DF DX times DX D H what is the
XD H hmm
a that's right this is a linear function
in H because X 0 is fixed right X 0 is a
constant a is a constant and H is a
variable I view this expression as a
function of H it's a linear function
we're used to this kind of things when
we talk about equations for lines we
would have x0 plus ta for example of it
so but usually we would call our
variables X Y Z or T now the fancy thing
is that I'm using this letter H for the
variable but of course you realize we
could use any variable the reason why
I'm using H is because in some sense
it's not very variable so I don't want
to mix it with the other variables we've
used because in some sense it plays a
very special role here and also in the
book is the letter H is used of it so in
other words there are some real
for using H which have nothing to do
with the subject matter right it's just
a matter of convenience or a customer
and so on and if you view this as a
function of H it's just a linear
function in H and as such its derivative
is just a it's just the coefficient in
front of it so this is a I'm sorry this
is a let's let me just write it here
GX eh-eh
and likewise the y EA H it V so
therefore the second term is VF dy times
B so finally we get the formula for the
directional derivative directional
derivative with respect to a general
vector D U which is a B is just and I
want to write it a slightly different
way a times I'll doesn't matter I can
write in this order FX of X zero Y zero
times a plus F sub y x0 y0 times B just
this formula but now I switch back to
the old notation F sub X F sub y the
reason why I use this notation for chain
rule is because if you write it and this
way it's easier to remember the formula
because you can kind of remember that
almost it's as though you could actually
cancel them out even though you can't
but it's a kind of a useful rule to just
memorize the formula but now it's sort
of more convenient to to use the old
meditation because I wanted to to
emphasize that it looks very similar to
the old formulas for partial derivatives
which I which I wrote here so in fact
there is no mystery the rate of change
the rate of change in the general vector
is a combination of the rates of change
in the X direction and the y direction
and in retrospect what else could it be
I mean if you look at this formula you
see that it's very natural suppose you
already know the rate of change in the X
direction and you know the rate of
change in the Y direction what will be
the rate of change sort of in the middle
if you go 45 degrees to X & Y well
clearly it will be it will be just sort
of a combination with equal coefficients
right both of them will contribute in
the same way the point is like which
which coefficients should we choose well
the coefficients we choose will be
coefficients of the unit vector so the
square root of a squared plus B squared
is 1 that's how we agree from the
beginning to define direction by unit
vectors and so then we use those
components as the weighting factors you
can think of this as a weighting factor
each of the two partial derivatives
contributes to the rate of change in the
Pacific to the vector a B and they
contribute with the weighting factors a
and B in other words if a is greater
than B then this the first partial
derivative will contribute more and will
contribute exactly proportionally to the
difference between two the ratio between
a and B so that's the formula that we
get this is a formula for the directions
religion ok and now we can first go
calculate the rest of derivatives in
practical situations ok and we can also
discuss the following question in which
direction in which direction you do we
achieve the largest or or the smallest
rate of change right so the key to
answering this last question is to
understand that this looks like dot
product and it is actually dot product
right because we have already a and B as
a vector the components of a vector
namely the vector U our unit vector and
then if we put the two partial
derivatives together
components of another vector okay we can
then see that this formula is actually
nothing but the dot product between
these two vectors right so let me take
the two parts of derivatives and put
them together as components of a vector
a very natural thing to do if you think
well I have why haven't you thought
about this before it's the most natural
thing to do because we know that when we
have you know to get to get a vector say
on a plane we need to we need two
components and here there are two
natural components because there are two
partial derivatives x and y so why not
put them all together into a one single
vector that's this vector and then we
have our vector U if we take the dot
product between them we'll get precisely
this expression obviously so this is a
dot product between our original
direction vector and some other vector
so it looks like this vector is
important okay so we have them in fact
we will introduce a notation for in
terminology for it this reactor is
called the gradient vector gradient
vector for the function f I have the
point x 0 Y Z and we will introduce a
notation for it in a Blair and to
emphasize that it's a vector we put an
arrow like that okay so that this is a
gradient vector so what have we learned
so far we have learned first of all in
addition to to two partial derivatives
we for functions into various what we
have studied before
there are also derivatives with respect
to a given direction vector which would
choose to be a unit vector you
kokin components a and B but this this
derivative is nothing but the rate of
change in the direction u it's given by
this formula it can also be thought of
as a derivative of the function f with
respect to some ability variable H if we
write x and y as functions of H in this
way and finally we have a formula for
the directional derivative as the dot
product between our original vector a B
the the direction vector a a B and
another vector which is determined by
the function f and the points X 0 y 0
this vector is just has two components
which are nothing but the partial
derivatives this vector is called the
gradient vector ok
so what is the geometric significance so
you ask what does this formula mean what
is the geometric significance of this
vector and and how can we use this this
formula to answer various questions
about the rate of change of our function
ok and here we have this I have to
explain a very important interpretation
geometric interpretation with gradient
vector and the interpretation is that
this vector this is a normal vector this
is in fact a normal vector to the level
curve of F at the point and 0 Y Z ok so
let me
let me explain this yeah last year
exactly I'm just thinking if this
blackboard is big enough for me maybe I
should for this book let me save it for
something else okay and go on let me use
a bigger one so first of all let's
recall let's talk about level curves we
have a function in two variables which
has a graph okay so for instance so
let's say it's an elliptic paraboloid or
something like this now when I want to
draw it to give it to give the illusion
of it being 3d instead of 2d what I
usually do is I draw the circles right
to give the illusion of three
dimensionality what are the circles
these are the level curves these are the
curves which we get by intersecting this
graph by plane parallel to the XY plane
so for example four instances is
intersection intersection of the graph
with the plane Z equals some let's code
G zero so let's say our point our point
could be somewhere here that's our point
X 0 and y 0 and this is the value this
is the value of the function at this
point so we'll call it Z zero so the
zero is actually f of X 0 y 0
but now we look at all points on the
same graph we share this value of Z what
does it mean it means that we just cut
it by by a horizontal plane which is at
the level Z 0 that's why we call it the
level curve because this is a level 2
corresponds to a fixed level of the
function ok
so in other words this is the curve
which is given by the equation the
equation for this curve is f of X Y is
equal to 0 now let's be a little bit
more precise the level curve actually
lives in space right the level curve is
in three-dimensional space it does not
belong to the XY plane usually unless
the level is 0 if the level is 0 then of
course it will be part of the XY plane
but everything here on the other hand is
a curve on the XY plane right so to say
that this is the equation for the level
curve is not strictly speaking correct
more precisely this is the equation of
the curve which I obtained by dropping
this level curve onto the XY plane in
other words what I can do is I can just
drop this take the projection of this
level curve onto the XY plane so it has
exactly the same shape so in this case
let's say it's a circle let's say or
maybe an ellipse if you want a more
general elliptic paraboloid and so this
is going to be exactly the same circle
of the same radius or the same ellipse
except that this guy was living at level
v-0 and it just dropped it to level 0 so
it
it's on the XY plane so often time when
we talk about level curves we will not
distinguish between the level curves as
the curve which leads on the graph and
its projection on to the XY plane
because in some sense once you cut it by
that by the plane parallel to the XY XY
plane it sort of lost its three
dimensionality it's become an object
which is better to think of as an object
in the two-dimensional ambient space so
to be exactly correct we would have to
say that this curve leaving is leaving
on the graph itself in the
three-dimensional space is defined by
two equations the first equation is V
equals Z 0 that defines the level that's
this plane by which we cut cut this
graph right plus the equation f of XY
equals Z 0 but oftentimes you will
forget about this and just look at the
projection at the crisp onion curve on
the XY plane so that's the level curve
and now what I'm claiming except the way
I drew it is not it's not very good
because it would have to go through the
point x0 y0 and now my picture is very
misleading in fact right so I has to be
has to be more like to be more like this
the question is what we want at
something that looks more beautiful or
something that is correct so I am afraid
we have to do something let's have to do
the correct one instead of a beautiful
one so maybe let me just erase little
bit didn't do a good job at the video
like this something like this as long as
I don't make any sharp corners I think
it's okay
okay so yeah so this is very important
of course this curve has to go through
the point x0 y0 because this was the
very general point on the level curve
that's how that's why we talked about
the level curve to begin with because of
this point we look at all other points
which they are the same value of the
function okay and so now what I'm
claiming is that if you draw the
gradient vector if you draw the gradient
vector table starting at this point then
it will be exactly perpendicular to this
level curve which is which is to say
that it's it's perpendicular to the
tangent line to this point and that's
the geometrical significance of this
gradient vector okay
so now so now we're getting in a kind of
a confusing territory because now we are
going to have an interplay between
different objects between tangent lines
tangent planes and various normal
vectors so I want to sort of set it all
straight for you so this is the first
result that I'm going to emphasize which
is that the gradient vector that we
discussed f sub X and F sub y is normal
to this curve perpendicular which is
what I will here normal vector to the
level curve of X at X 0 y 0 given by the
equation by the equation f of XY equals
Z 0 right so this is the first fact
now I want to I want to relate this fact
to another fact which is which we
understood which we realized two weeks
ago about tangent planes to the graph
and that fact is the following that the
vector F sub X at X 0 y 0 F sub y at X 0
y 0 and then if one is the normal vector
he is a normal vector to the tangent
line to the graph both F at the point of
0 Y you okay and I want to explain that
these two things are very closely
related to each other and in fact one
implies the other so you see and this is
a very important point to understand
that at this we look at this graph and
we have this point on the graph ok we
have this point on this graph because
the graph itself is two-dimensional
there is a tangent plane to the graph
which I'm not going to try to draw back
it is like this right tangent line to
the graph so in fact let me use this as
a model we use this model for it ok in
other words I will not have the
paraboloid you have to you'll have to
imagine the paraboloid somewhere here
right this but think of this as a
tangent plane which is missing in that
picture because we would be to missing
to make this is a tangent plane okay and
the paraboloid goes like this remember I
brought the vaad last time or whenever
it's 2 weeks ago so there is this
paraboloid which goes like this and this
plane touches the paraboloid that /
below it at one point let's say at this
point so this is the fact number one
fact number two
the paraboloid has a level curve which
passes through this point which would be
a circle going like this the levels will
be parallel to the floor right so the
level will be it's just going to be the
plane which is parallel to the floor
which goes to this point it will cut the
paraboloid over a circle it will make a
circle at or below it and therefore we
will get a curve on the on the graph the
circle okay now where this plane touches
the whole graph and in particular it
touches the level curve but inside this
plane I will have a line which is
specifically tangent to to the level
curve so this is the tangent line to the
level curve you see what I mean on this
picture on this picture I drew this
tangent line downstairs because what all
what very thing I did is I drop the
level curve onto the XY plane and then I
drew the tangent line this tangent line
but now let me draw this tangent line
right here so this wise tangent line is
that tangent line over there okay I hope
this makes sense okay but now the point
is that this tangent line belongs to the
tangent plane you see that there are two
tangent things there is a tangent plane
to the whole graph and there is a
tangent line to just the level curve but
level curve is part of the graph
so each tangent line has to be part of
the tangent thing to everything which is
the tangent plane that's why I drew that
line I drew that line on this tangent
plane and now let's talk about normals
the normal vector to the entire tangent
plane we discussed last time or whatever
two weeks ago and that's the vector
which has F sub X F sub y and negative 1
right when we use that normal vector to
write down the equation of the tangent
plane which was like
is Z 0 is equal to FX and so on right so
this we knew this we knew from before
that's that's the that's a normal vector
but now I want to talk about the normal
vector to just the tangent to the
tangent line to the level curve which is
not the same thing you see because this
vector has three components because it's
a normal vector to a plane in space
right has three components but now I
want to talk about the normal vector to
the curve and again this curve can be
thought of in truth it has sort of two
different incarnations one is the curve
which lives on the graph itself so it's
sort of list it's elevated over the XY
plane and then there is a tangent line
so really this tangent line my my
picture is terrible because this took us
to parallel of course right my worst
worth drawing so far imagine that these
two are parallel okay looks like non
Euclidean Euclidean geometry the
parallel lines intersect they shouldn't
so but anyway I don't want to waste more
time redrawing so let's just just trust
my work they are parallel to each other
okay even though it doesn't look this
way so I think the most confusing aspect
of this also story is incredibly
elementary but reason I'm explaining to
you because in my experience many people
find this confusing and I think the main
reason why people find confusing is
because there are two ways to think
about the level curve one is to think
about level curve as being part of the
graph which in some sense is is the
right way because it that's how it was
defined it was defined by intersecting
the graph with the plane but then we
realize that you know once you do that
the Z variable effectively disappears so
we might as well think of it as a s
occur as a curve on the XY plane even
better let's think of this plane as
being the XY plane and then it actually
we don't have to move it back and forth
just think of this as being a plane with
two coordinates x and y and now Z
coordinate okay
so as such this curve has a tangent
tangent line okay and the question is
what is the equation of this tangent
line that's what I'm that's what I'm I'm
getting it so the equation of the
tangent line the equation of the tangent
line we can obtain very easily from the
equation of the tangent plane because
let me remind you the equation for the
tangent plane equation for the tangent
plane the equation for the tangent plane
is like this V - V 0 is equal to F sub X
x0 y0 times X minus x0 plus F sub y
right that's the equation which we have
discussed many times and was an even
even on the meter and of course
saying that that's the equation of the
tangent plane is precisely saying that
this is the normal vector right because
these are the component F sub X F sub y
and negative 1y negative 1 because if
you take this to the right-hand side you
will see that G minus v-0 appears with
coefficients negative 1 places that's
the negative that's this negative 1 this
negative 1 is here because we have this
term G minus v-0 ok that's the equation
of the tangent plane and now I would
like to write down the equation for the
tangent line to the level curve inside
this plane what should I do for this
well on the level curve G is equal to G
0 that's the definition of the level
curve on the level curve
V is just identically equal to Z zero
everywhere on this level curve Z is
equal to Z zero right so this has to
drop out this has to disappear and then
we'll get the equation of the of the of
the part which is tangent to just the
level curve so therefore the equation of
the tangent line of tangent line to the
level curve is f sub X of X 0 y 0 times
X minus x0 plus F sub y of X 0 y 0 times
y minus y 0 is 0 that's the equation of
the type of the tension so let me remind
you that these are numbers right these
are the numbers two numbers and these
are the variables so we have X minus x0
y minus y0 and what are these two
numbers these two numbers are precisely
the components of the gradient vector
slightly the components of the gradient
vector in other words you see in the
equation of the tangent plane we have
the two partial derivatives but we also
have this negative one which comes
because of this term z minus z0 right
but once we look when we when we focus
on the on the level curve this G minus D
0 disappears so the only information
which is left is the two partial
derivatives FX and FY and we get the
equation for the for the tangent lines
of this level curve ok any questions
about this yes
that's right it's on the XY plane
exactly so I want to do I want to do the
analysis of everything related to the
level curve on the XY plane
strictly speaking each time I would have
to add the equation Z equals Z 0 to
indicate that actually this plane is
elevated to that level Z 0 but usually
we don't do that we just kind of skip
that ok but it has to be understood you
either have to think that you're here
but then each time you have to write add
the equation Z equals Z 0 or you could
you can just say ok we are just thinking
about XY about dropping everything onto
the XY plane ok but now this equation is
very suggestive because this equation is
just like the equations of planes that
we are used to writing right so I claim
that this equation this equation
precisely means that this is a normal
vector to this line so therefore is the
normal vector to to the tangent line to
to this tangent line to this tangent
line
which is illustrated by this picture
this yellow vector is the gradient
vector which is this is a gradient
vector this is it is perpendicular to
the tangent line or normal to the
tangent line but to say normal to the
tangent line is the same as saying
normal to the curve itself right we
don't distinguish between being normal
to the curve and being normal to the
tangent line is the same thing because
it's something about just a very small
neighborhood so linear approximation is
good enough for this why is that a
normal vector that's actually something
we should have we should have talked
about before which what we didn't so let
me this is sort of a a digression what
is the general equation of a line on the
plane so actually let me do it by as a
kind of analogy okay here we'll look at
planes r3 and here we will talk about
lines on in r2 what is the equation what
is the general equation of a plane in r3
which we know very well a X minus x0
plus B y minus y0 plus C Z minus Z 0 to
0 okay we emphasize is a B and C what
are this a B and C a B and C are
components of the normal depth normal
vector to this plane for a good reason
which we explained you know when we
talked about planes now I want to to
express lines in our to in the same way
and I claim that a line a general line
in r2
can be written exactly the same way
except I don't
have the last last term because there's
no G so a times X minus x0 plus D times
y minus y0 i claim that just like this
is an equation of a plane in r3 this is
an equation of a line in r2 for the same
reason it's actually simpler because
it's a leiden in two-dimensional space
as opposed to plane but we never talked
about this somehow because because well
usually we talk about lines that's given
by equation at y equals KX plus B or
something but actually that's not the
most general equation because what if
you don't have a coefficient in front of
Y what did you have it doesn't take care
of the vertical line so this is the most
general formula for a line in r2 which
allows vertical horizontal lines
whatever and of course if you believe in
this formula you've got to believe in
this formula because first of all you
get this formula by stating V equals 0
this line is the level curve of this
plane at Z equals 0 right so that's
obvious that's obviously the case but
then if you believe in this you also
have to believe the fact that a and B if
you take these two coefficients a and B
that this is a normal vector to this
line this is normal reactor to this line
okay
ABC was normal vector to the plane a and
B is a normal vector to the line but now
my line here my tangent line which I'm
trying to explain as it's very important
is given by this formula which is
exactly like this formula where a this
is a and this is B right
if so then the corresponding vector a B
is the normal vectors of that line and
that's the gradient so I have proved
that this statement one that the
gradient is a normal vector to the level
curve okay so there are two important
vectors which show up when you have a
graph of a function one is a normal to
the to the plain to the entire tangent
plane and the other one is normal to the
to the tangent line to the level curve
which is a vector that is parallel to
the floor parallel to the XY plane and
there is a very simple connection
between them the first of them has three
components because it's a vector in
three space which are F X F Y and
negative one and the second one is
obtained from this one by chopping off
this negative one and when you do that
what's left is Jeff
this one is gone - I know it's better
okay all right
hopefully it will survive the next five
minutes okay so so let me repeat this
for our worldwide viewing audience we
shouldn't forget them this negative one
is important okay a negative one is
because the equation of the plane had if
we put Z and minus D 0 to the same side
of the equation it will appear with
coefficients negative 1 and that's
exactly this negative one over there
okay and that's the Z component of the
normal vector so you see the point is
that the normal vector to the two the
graph is like this it tilted it's not
like this it's not parallel to the floor
it's tilted because the plane is tilted
but the normal vector to the two this
line is going to be inside the same
plane which is the plane that is
parallel to the floor so therefore it
will be like this what we do we lose we
lose that negative one well here it
appears like it's positive 1 but there
is analyzed because in fact it is like
this it was like this but if you think
about the tangent the normal vector is
being like this then you will see what I
mean because they think about that
picture so this is I feel like a wave
I'm waiting to play my hand too much but
if you think about the normal vector as
being on this side which you can see but
you can imagine then you will see that
it's the component is negative one okay
all right now so now hopefully we
understand the geometry of this whole
thing so let's do let's do a small
let's do an extra small exercise that's
a small exercise suppose that f of X Y
is X cubed minus 4x squared y plus y
squared and the first question is to
compute the directional derivative with
respect to the vector U which is 3/5 and
4/5 at the point 0 negative 1 so see
this X 0 and y 0 and these are a and B
we call them this is not the same 8 in
video maybe not let me not use it in
Vietnam because at the beginning I used
a and B as well as components of the
vector U but now I'm using in the in my
later discussion I was using a and B as
components of the normal of the normal
vector so let's just not okay so what
what do we need to do for this well we
need to find the gradient vector because
the direction derivative of F at this
point is the dot product of the gradient
at this point and the vector u so U we
are given vector u we are given so we
need to calculate the gradient vector
and gradient vector consists of the two
partial derivatives right so we need to
calculate F sub X is equal to 3x squared
minus 8y and F sub y is minus 4x squared
plus 2y and then we start we calculate
them at this point
so here we get a and here we get yes
that's right XY thank you I'm good I'm
glad somewhere somebody's paying
attention a little quick so this is zero
actually here right this is zero and
second one I think I got did I get it
right I got it right so that's going to
be twenty two so the dot product is
going to be between zero 92 and this one
which is 3/5 and 4/5 and by the way know
that this is indeed a unit vector if you
take this squared plus this squared
you'll get one right so now we take the
dot product and the dot product is minus
8 over 5 so that's the answer for for
the rate of change or directional
derivative in this direction now another
question which will you will also
encounter is the following in which
direction is the direction of the
relative take that the direction
derivative take the maximum possible
value okay and for this you have to find
U for which this dot product will give
you the maximum possible value right you
see you cannot change this vector this
is just the gradient vector once your
point is given this vector is fixed but
the direction you can travel any
direction you want so you can ask given
this vector in which vector which vector
will give you the maximum possible dot
product okay and of course we know that
the dot product is equal to the product
of the lengths times the cosine so to
maximize the dot product we have to say
we have to maximize the cosine and
maximize cosine means the cosine is
equal to 1 or negative 1 if you think in
terms of the absolute values and so so
that means that the vector the direction
vector has to be the unit vector in the
direction of the gradient okay so that's
how you solve this second part okay I'm
out of time so we'll continue on sources